Well let's start talking now
about scope of variables.
So Oracle's Java Specification states, quote,
"The scope of a declaration is the region of the programme
within which the entity declared by the declaration
can be referred to using a simple name,
provided it is visible."
Unquote.
A local variable, formal parameter, exception parameter,
and a local class can only be referred to
using a simple name, and not a qualified name.
Because of this, some declarations aren't permitted
within the scope of these elements.
Now this can be re-stated.
If you cannot qualify a variable name in its current scope
then you cannot create another local variable name
in a more limited scope.
And I'll demonstrate that in some code in this video,
in the next one.
So there are several scopes that we'll need to understand
and that you'll be tested on
when you're creating local variables.
So the scopes that we're gonna deal with is class scope,
instance, method, loop, loop block
and a block including an exception block.
All right, so I've created a new project called Scope
and now I'm gonna create a new class called Persons.
Let's go ahead and do that.
(computer keys typing)
All right.
So here we've got one class variable, name,
we've got two instance variables, instanceName and age
and we've also got several contractors.
We've got no arguments constructor,
we've got a single and a two arguments constructors as well.
Now constructors are perfect examples
of how a method parameter name
can have the same name as class
or the instance variable name.
In this constructor, the one on line 18,
the Person instance age doesn't get set at all
and that's because age is not qualified by this,
so this.age.
Now this is a common mistake and may be tested in the exam.
In the case of the two arguments constructor,
the constructor parameters are named
and typed the same as the class variable name
in the instance variable age.
Correctly setting the object's age using this qualifier
you can see on line 34, this.age equals age.
And we've done a similar thing to instanceName.
Note also that's setting a static variable name
in the same assignment statement.
So we've got this.instanceName equals person.name
equals name.
All right, so let's go ahead now and add a couple of methods
to our Person class which demonstrate how we can reference
class and instance variables with or without a qualifier.
So I'm gonna add a couple of setters
and also our toString method.
Just gonna paste that code in.
So we've got our two simple setters as you can see there
for set age and that set instanceName.
We've also got toString.
So in the case of the toString,
instance and class variable names
have scope within all non-static methods
of the enclosing class, no qualifiers required.
That said, qualifiers do help readability.
All right, so let's try testing this and to do that,
we'll create another class and call it TestPerson
and we'll do some instantiation of our Person class.
So there's the code.
So you can see we're creating various instantiations
of the Person object.
So let's just run this.
So you can see that PERSON.name,
because it's a class variable, will maintain the last value
it's set to, which was DEB, and that's because
only the two arguments constructors
set PERSON.name.
Also the code demonstrates that ANN's information
was set to defaults, instanceName equals UNKNOWN
when an age equals 25, and that's because we used
the No Args Constructor initially.
Now setting age variables in the setters
did the job and gave ANN her name and her real age.
All right, so so far so good hopefully.
Let's explore a lower level
local variable declarations with our Person class
by adding a method that will print out
the generational category of our person.
I'm just gonna pop up this slide.
This is what we're trying to do is, based on the age range
we want to output or set a string to be that value.
So coming back to our Person class.
I'm gonna paste in the code
right at the bottom of the class.
So that's our getAgeGroupClassification method
as you can see there.
And so depending on the value of age
we're updating the ageClassification local variable
to an appropriate value based on that age.
Right, so now that we've done that, let's actually update
our toString method on the Person class
and put this information out.
Now that words will invoke a call
to our getAgeGroupClassification method.
So go back up to our toString.
And we'll just update that.
Oh, I can see now showing the instanceName and the age
and then when invoking getAgeGroupClassification as well.
So let's now go back to our TestPerson class.
And what I'm going to do is just copy and paste.
A cutdown method that is a bit more concise
and we'll actually run this now.
And you can see the output we've got there.
JOE is 55 years old, Baby Boomer in parentheses.
DEB 85 years old, The Silent Generation
and ANN is 21 years old, Millennial.
All right so moving on,
let's now test declaring local variables a little further
using the method we just added to Person.
So in other words our GetAgeGroupClassification method.
So we can go back there.
So in this first if statement that we got on line 72,
let's declare it your local variable,
but with the same name as ageClassification,
which is defined on line 67.
So I'm jut gonna add the type there on line 73.
(computer keys typing)
Now generally this would be perfectly fine,
except we've already created a local variable
with this name and the surrounding scope
and the compiler can't distinguish
which age classification is meant in this if statement
and so therefore a compiler error occurs
saying the ageClassification is already defined
in the scope.
So we'll undo that change.
All right so, let's take a look at this Millennial code
the if test, the if that's on line 80.
And let's make a change to that.
I'm going to replace that bit of code.
So you can see we've got a little
slightly more complex test there.
If age is greater than equal to 20
it still sets the ageClassification to be Millennial.
However, it also checks now to see whether the age
is greater than equal to 21 and assigns a variable age type
or assigns a value of Voting and adds that ultimately on
line 86 to the ageClassification variable.
So if we run this now.
You can see the outputs change slightly,
specifically ANN is 21 years old Voting Millennial now
and that's because of the change we introduced here
to our code starting at line 80.
Now you probably know the answer to this but what would
happen if we moved ageClassification.
So if we go back to that code, if I move this line,
outside the scope,
put it in there.
Can probably guess what's gonna happen.
Here we're attempting to reference the ageType
outside the scope where it was declared
and you can see it was declared ageType on line 82
and the compiler won't let you do it.
If we hover over the error, cannot resolve symbol ageType,
no surprises there.
All right so I'm gonna undo that change.
(computer keys typing)
All right so I'm gonna finish the video here
and in the next one we'll continue on with our discussion
of Scope and we'll start by looking at method Scope.
See you in the next video.